this is a talk about sugar and cancer
and I became interested in sugar when I
was in college not this kind of sugar it
was the sugar that our biology
professors taught us about in the
context of the coding of your cells and
maybe you didn't know that your cells
are coated with sugar and I didn't know
that either until I took these courses
in college but back then and this was in
let's just call it the 1980s people
didn't know much about why our cells are
coated with sugar and when I dug through
my notes what I noticed I had written
down is that the sugar coating on
ourselves is like the sugar coating on a
peanut M&M and people thought the sugar
coating on ourselves was like a
protective coating that somehow made our
cells stronger or tougher but we now
know many decades later that it's much
more complicated than that
and that the sugars on our cells are
actually very complex and if you could
shrink yourself down to a little
miniature airplane and fly right along
the surface of your cells it might look
something like this with geographical
features and now the complex sugars are
these trees and bushes weeping willows
that are swaying in the wind and moving
with the waves and when I started
thinking about all these complex sugars
that are like this foliage on ourselves
it became one of the most interesting
problems that I encountered as a
biologist and also as a chemist and so
now we tend to think about the sugars
that are populating the surface of
ourselves as a language they have a lot
of information stored in their complex
structures but what are they trying to
tell us I can tell you that
we do know some information that comes
from these sugars and it's turned out
already to be incredibly important in
the world of Medicine for example one
thing your sugars are telling us is your
blood type so your blood cells your red
blood cells are coated with sugars and
the chemical structures of those sugars
determine your blood type so for example
I know that I am blood type O and how
many people are also blood type O get
your hands up it's a pretty common one
and so when so few hands go up either
you're not paying attention or you don't
know your blood type and both of those
are bad okay but for those of you who
share the blood type O with me what this
means is that we have this chemical
structure on the surface of our blood
cells three simple sugars linked
together to make a more complex sugar
and that by definition is blood type O
now how many people are blood type a
right here so that means you have an
enzyme in your cells that adds one more
building block that red sugar to build a
more complex structure and how many
people are blood type B quite a few you
have a slightly different enzyme than
the a people so you build a slightly
different structure and those of you
that are a B have the enzyme from your
mother or the other enzyme from your
father and now you make both of these
structures in roughly equal proportions
and when this was figured out which is
now back in the previous century this
enabled one of the most important
medical procedures in the world which of
course is the blood transfusion and by
knowing what your blood type is we can
make sure if you ever need a transfusion
that your donor has the same blood type
so that your body doesn't see foreign
sugars which it wouldn't like and would
certainly reject what else are the
sugars on the surface of your cells
trying to tell us well those sugars
might be telling us that you have cancer
so a few decades ago correlations began
to emerge from the analysis of tumor
tissue and the typical scenario
is a patient would have a tumor detected
and the tissue would be removed in a
biopsy procedure and then sent down to a
pathology lab where that tissue would be
analyzed to look for chemical changes
that might inform the oncologist about
the best course of treatment and what
was discovered from studies like that is
that the sugars have changed when the
cell transforms from being healthy to
being sick and those correlations have
come up again and again and again but a
big question in the field has been why
why do cancers have different sugars
what's the importance of that why does
it happen and what can we do about it if
it does turn out to be related to the
disease process so one of the changes
that we study is an increase in the
density of a particular sugar that's
called sialic acid and I think this is
going to be one of the most important
sugars of our time so I would encourage
everybody to get familiar with this word
sialic acid is not the kind of sugar
that we eat those are different sugars
this is a kind of sugar that is actually
found at certain levels on all of the
cells in your body it's actually quite
common on your cells but for some reason
cancer cells at least in a successful
progressive disease they tend to have
more sciatic acid then a normal healthy
cell would have and why what does that
mean
well what we've learned is that it has
to do with your immune system so let me
tell you a little bit about the
importance of your immune system in
cancer and this is something that's I
think in the news a lot these days you
know people are starting to become
familiar with the term cancer immune
therapy and some of you might even know
people who are benefiting from these
very new ways of treating cancer
what we now know is that your immune
cells which are the white blood cells
coursing through your bloodstream they
protect you on a daily basis from things
gone bad including cancer and so in this
picture those little green balls are
your immune cells and that big pink cell
is a cancer cell and these immune cells
they go around and they taste all the
cells in your body that's their job and
most of the time the cells taste okay
but once in a while a cell might taste
bad hopefully that's the cancer cell and
when those immune cells get the bad
taste they launch an all-out strike and
they kill those cells so we know that we
also know that if you can potentiate
that tasting if you can encourage those
immune cells to actually take a big old
bite out of a cancer cell you get a
better job protecting yourself from
cancer every day and maybe even curing a
cancer and there are now a couple of
drugs out there in the market that are
used to treat cancer patients that act
exactly by this process they activate
the immune system so that the immune
system can be more vigorous in
protecting us from cancer and in fact
one of those drugs may well have spared
President Jimmy Carter's life to
remember President Carter had malignant
melanoma that had metastasized to his
brain and that diagnosis is one that is
usually accompanied by numbers like
months to live but he was treated with
one of these new immune stimulating
drugs and now his melanoma appears to be
in remission which is remarkable
considering the situation only a few
years ago in fact so remarkable that
provocative statements like this one
cancer is having a penicillin moment
people are saying with these new immune
therapy drugs I mean that's an
incredibly bold thing to say about a
disease which we've been fighting for a
long time and mostly losing the battle
with so this is very exciting now what
does this have to do with sugars well
I'll tell you what we've learned
when an immune cell snuggles up against
a cancer cell to take a taste it's
looking for signs of disease and if it
finds those signs the cell gets
activated and it launches a missile
strike and kills the cell but if that
cancer cell has a dense forest of that
sugar sialic acid well it starts to
taste pretty good and there's a protein
on immune cells that grabs the sialic
acid and if that protein gets held at
that synapse between the immune cell and
the cancer cell it puts that immune cell
to sleep the sialic acids are telling
the immune so hey the cells are right
nothing to see here move along look
somewhere else so in other words as long
as our cells are wearing a thick coat of
silac acid they look fabulous right it's
amazing and what if you could strip off
that coat and take that sugar away well
your immune system might be able to see
that cancer cell for what it really is
something that needs to be destroyed and
so this is what we're doing in my lab
we're developing new medicines that are
basically cell surface lawnmowers
molecules that go down to the surface of
these cancer cells and just cut off
those sialic acids so that the immune
system can reach its full potential in
eliminating those cancer cells from our
body so in closing let me just remind
you again your cells are coated with
sugars the sugars are telling cells
around that cell whether the cell is
good or bad and that's important because
our immune system needs to leave the
good cells alone otherwise we'd have
autoimmune diseases but once in a while
cancers get the ability to express these
new sugars and now that we understand
how those sugars
mesmerize the immune system we can come
up with new medicines to wake up those
immune cells tell them ignore the sugars
eat the cell and have a delicious snack
on cancer thank you
[Applause]
[Music]